Add post on moving SciPy to Meson (#224)
Quansight-Labs/quansight-labs-site: posts/2021/07/moving-scipy-to-meson.md

<!--
.. title: Moving SciPy to the Meson build system
.. slug: moving-scipy-to-meson
.. date: 2021-07-25 09:00:00 UTC-00:00
.. author: Ralf Gommers
.. tags: Labs, SciPy, Meson, build, packaging
.. category:
.. link:
.. description:
.. type: text
-->

Let's start with an announcement: _**SciPy now builds with
[Meson](https://mesonbuild.com/) on Linux, and the full test suite passes!**_

This is a pretty exciting milestone, and good news for SciPy maintainers and
contributors - they can look forward to much faster builds and a more
pleasant development experience. So how fast is it? Currently the build takes

> about 1min 50s on my 3 year old 12-core Intel CPU (i9-7920X @ 2.90GHz):

Reviewer: Can you add something like "instead of more than 10 minutes when using the current `distutils` based build"

Author: adding "a ~4x improvement"

![Profiling result of a parallel build of SciPy with Meson](/images/2021/07/ninjabuild_tracing_12jobs.png)

*Profiling result of a parallel build (12 jobs) of SciPy with Meson. Visualization created with [ninjatracing](https://github.com/nico/ninjatracing/blob/master/ninjatracing) and [Perfetto](https://ui.perfetto.dev).*

As you can see from the tracing results, building a single C++ file
(`bsr.cxx`, one of SciPy's sparse matrix formats) takes over 90 seconds. So

> short of major surgery on that C++ code or buying a newer CPU, the 1min 50sec

Author: thanks, rephrasing to _" So the 1min 50 sec build time is close to optimal - the only ways to improve it are major surgery on that C++ code, or buying a faster CPU."_ Is that better?

> short of major surgery on that C++ code or buying a newer CPU, the 1min 50sec

Reviewer 2: Yeah, got it. This rephrased sentence makes it clear and easy to understand.

[setuptools/issues/2372](https://github.com/pypa/setuptools/issues/2372) for
more details). It has become clear though that this will be a really slow and
painful process - after almost a year, the vendored `distutils` still hasn't
been re-enabled inside `setuptools`.

The other driver was that SciPy development has become more painful over
time. SciPy contains C, C++, Fortran and Cython code, exports C and Cython
APIs, has complex dependencies (see diagram below) and does a lot of code
generation. The growing amount of C++ and Cython code has increased build
times. CI systems frequently time out because build plus test suite run takes
close to 60 minutes (the limit on several free-for-open-source CI offerings).
Working on compiled code is cumbersome and slow, to the point where a couple
of other maintainers have told me it's a blocker for them to work on new
features. Finally, debugging build issues is quite difficult - `distutils`
doesn't really have a design, so every other extension just monkey patches
things as needed. Earlier in the year I spent half a day hunting a build
problem through four (!) different projects that all modified how extensions

> are built.

Reviewer: Nice to have: is there a  link to this work?

Author: I can't find it so quickly - it was somewhere in the Pythran integration PRs. I'm not sure there's much to learn from that, other than "this is a giant mess".

                "-fPIC",
                "-DNPY_NO_DEPRECATED_API=NPY_1_9_API_VERSION"
            ],
            "sources": [
                "/home/rgommers/code/bldscipy/scipy/sparse/sparsetools/bsr.cxx",
                "/home/rgommers/code/bldscipy/scipy/sparse/sparsetools/csc.cxx",
                "/home/rgommers/code/bldscipy/scipy/sparse/sparsetools/csr.cxx",
                "/home/rgommers/code/bldscipy/scipy/sparse/sparsetools/other.cxx",
                "/home/rgommers/code/bldscipy/scipy/sparse/sparsetools/sparsetools.cxx"
            ],
            "generated_sources": []
        }
    ],
    "extra_files": [],
    "subproject": null,
    "installed": true,
    "install_filename": [
        "/usr/local/lib/python3.9/site-packages/scipy/sparse/_sparsetools.cpython-39-x86_64-linux-gnu.so"
    ]
}
```
This helps quickly pinpointing mistakes in your `meson.build` files. In
addition, debugging potential issues in Meson itself, the generated
`ninja.build` file is fairly readable too - its syntax is simple enough that
for example missing dependencies can be found (e.g., `scipy.cluster`
extensions depend on `scipy.linalg.cython_linalg`, and that dependency must

> be declared correctly).

Author: rephrased, thanks

### Other benefits

Other significant benefits include:

1. Cross-compiling will become possible. For years we've told people *"sorry,
   `distutils` wasn't really made for cross-compiling, let us know if you
   have any luck".* As a result we've completely ignored users on some exotic

>    platforms (doing native ), and also spent a lot of time fighting with

Reviewer: Something seems off with the "(doing native )", is there a word missing?

Author: stray words, removed. good catch

   different CI systems to do native builds. For example, we will likely want
   to cross-compile to `aarch64` rather than struggle with underpowered ARM
   hardware on Travis CI.
2. Developers can use multiple builds at the same time. Because Meson builds
   are out-of-tree by design, it is now easy to have for example a GCC build,
   a Clang build, and a Python debug build in parallel in the same repo.
3. More development tools work out of the box, e.g. `ccache` will just be
   picked up if it's installed, no configuration needed. I also managed to

>    get ASAN to work with only a few small tweaks.

Reviewer: Links to `ccache` and ASAN for newcomers might be nice

Author: thanks, added. and changed to AddressSanitizer to make clearer what it is without following the link

                                   'int main(int argc, char **argv) {}')
        if has_pthreads:
            ext.define_macros.append(('POCKETFFT_PTHREADS', None))
            if has_flag(cc, '-pthread'):
                args.append('-pthread')
                ext.extra_link_args.append('-pthread')
            else:
                raise RuntimeError("Build failed: System has pthreads header "
                                   "but could not compile with -pthread option")

        # Don't export library symbols
        try_add_flag(args, cc, '-fvisibility=hidden')

def configuration(parent_package='', top_path=None):
    ...
    config = Configuration('_pocketfft', parent_package, top_path)
    ext = config.add_extension('pypocketfft',
                               sources=['pypocketfft.cxx'],
                               depends=['pocketfft_hdronly.h'],
                               include_dirs=include_dirs,
                               language='c++')
    ext._pre_build_hook = pre_build_hook
```

## Some key Meson design principles

Meson is a well-designed build systems, and both the docs and a number of

> talks by Meson devs on YouTube do a great job at explaining that design. So I

Reviewer: links?

Author: adding

are particularly important and would have helped me to fully grasp when I
started on this project. So let's have a look at those.

*Builds must be out-of-tree.* Meson will not allow building inside your existing
source tree - and that includes code generation. There are good reasons for
this, but when coming from `distutils` it may bite you. For example, if you
have a script to generate Cython `.pyx` and `.pxd` files (quite common in
SciPy), those files cannot be placed next to the template, they must go into
a build directory (the one we chose with `meson setup <builddir>`).

*Meson is not Turing-complete, and not extensible via APIs.* What this means is
that if something is not supported in Meson itself, you cannot just write a
bit of Python code to hack around the problem. Instead, you must add it in
Meson itself. If that takes too long, just fork Meson and use your fork until
your feature is merged upstream. This *seems* painful, but it guarantees that
people don't just copy around changes from project to project and long-term
maintainability deteriorates. Instead, the philosophy is to fix things once
for all users.

> *All source files and targets must be list explicitly.* This means that if you

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*All source files and targets must be listed explicitly.* This means that if you
```

build a single Python extension from 50 Fortran files, you must list all 50
files names. This is not really a problem in practice, but it can be a little
verbose. Using a few helper snippets to generate file listings in IPython
saves time:
```python
>>> for f in sorted(os.listdir('.')):
...     if f.endswith('.f'):
...         print(f"  '{f}',")
... 
  'dgamln.f',
  'zabs.f',
  ...
```

*Meson has an imperative DSL with immutable objects.* The syntax of the DSL is
inspired by Python, and is easy to read. Objects - which can be dependencies,
generated files, built extensions, etc. - being immutable makes things easy
to debug, but in some cases it can restrict what you can do. For example,
this code for building all `scipy.sparse.csgraph` extensions is quite
elegant, but the `foreach` pattern will not work if the `.pyx` files are
generated. This is because they'd then be objects created by `custom_target`,
and there is no syntax to give them unique names within the `foreach` loop -

> this cost me some time to figure out:

Reviewer: Is there an open issue or a meson document that you could refer to with "for more information ..."

Author: Not that I know of. I also don't think it's a bug, it's just a consequence of how the DSL is designed.

*There is one escape hatch to do things Meson does not natively support: `custom_target`.*
As long you list its source files and outputs, you can invoke Python scripts
through `custom_target`. This is how the SciPy build invokes `numpy.f2py`,
Pythran and `cython --cplus` (Meson's Cython support is brand new, and only
supports targeting C if you give a `.pyx` file to `py3.extension_module`
right now).

## The sharp bits

Not everything was smooth sailing. Here are a few of the most important
issues I ran into:

1. Cython + generated sources. This was by far the most time-consuming topic.
   Cython's `cimport` mechanism relies on the complete source tree. For
   example, not having a `__init__.py` file two directories up from where the
   `.pyx` file that you are building lives changes the C code that Cython
   generates. The full source tree layout matters for Cython. Cython was
   largely designed around in-tree builds, and Meson only allows you to
   generate files out-of-tree. This necessitates hacks like writing scripts
   or invoking `cp` to copy over many `__init__.py` and `.pxi|.pxd` files.
   And then more hacks to ensure those files are respected as dependencies by

>    Ninja.

Reviewer: Maybe something to bring up with cython before the 3.0 release, could they add `__file__` to the cimport path?

Author: `__file__` is added to the cimport path. The issue is that the `cimport` in the `.pyx` file is now in `build/scipy/xxx/` rather than in `scipy/xxx/` and there's no way for Cython to know that the `.pyx` was code-generated. And the codegen script has no good way of adding `scipy/xxx/` to the import path.

Author: The whole `pyximport` mechanism is one big hack as far as I can tell.

2. SciPy is a tangled mess - there are 17 `scipy.xxx` submodules and almost all

>    of them depend on each other. So with a few exceptions, the tests only ran
>    once almost all submodules built with Meson. We have had issues in SciPy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   of them depend on each other. We could only start running tests after Meson 
   could build the appropriate submodules. We have had issues in SciPy
```

   with import cycles before, and I'm now surprised we didn't have more
   issues in the past.
3. One feature I missed in Meson: installing generated files with

>    `py3.install_sources` is not allowed. One can specify `install: true` in

Reviewer: link to `py3.install_sources`? Are there ideas how to mitigate this restriction moving forward?

Author: added a link. yes, we can just implement this in Meson, it looks like it's something that not many people needed so far.
